HDDS-5966. [HTTPFSGW] Update module doc, and place it in Ozone project docs (#4250)
apache/ozone: hadoop-hdds/docs/content/interface/HttpFS.md

---
title: HttpFS Gateway
weight: 4
menu:
main:
parent: "Client Interfaces"
summary: Ozone HttpFS is a WebHDFS compatible interface implementation, as a separate role it provides an easy integration with Ozone.
---

<!---
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
  contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
  this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
  The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
  (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
  the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

      http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License.
-->

Ozone HttpFS can be used to integrate Ozone with other tools via REST API.

## Introduction

> Ozone HttpFS is forked from the HDFS HttpFS endpoint implementation ([HDDS-5448](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HDDS-5448)). It is added as a separate role to Ozone, like S3G. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ozone HttpFS is forked from the HDFS HttpFS endpoint implementation ([HDDS-5448](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HDDS-5448)). It is added as a separate role to Ozone, similar to [S3 Gateway]({{< ref "design/s3gateway.md" >}}). 
```

HttpFS is a service that provides a REST HTTP gateway supporting File System operations (read and write). It is interoperable with the **webhdfs** REST HTTP API.

> HttpFS can be used to access data on an Ozone cluster behind of a firewall (the HttpFS service acts as a gateway and is the only system that is allowed to cross the firewall into the cluster).

Reviewer: I do realize this is copied straight from https://hadoop.apache.org/docs/stable/hadoop-hdfs-httpfs/index.html but I can't help but reframed it a bit to my liking.

HttpFS can be used to access data in Ozone using HTTP utilities (such as curl and wget) and HTTP libraries Perl from other languages than Java.

The **webhdfs** client FileSystem implementation can be used to access HttpFS using the Ozone filesystem command line tool (`ozone fs`) as well as from Java applications using the Hadoop FileSystem Java API.

HttpFS has built-in security supporting Hadoop pseudo authentication and Kerberos SPNEGO and other pluggable authentication mechanisms. It also provides Hadoop proxy user support.

## Getting started

> HttpFS service itself is a Jetty based web-application that uses the Hadoop FileSystem API to talk to the cluster, it is a separate service which provides access to Ozone via a REST API. It should be started additionally to the regular Ozone components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HttpFS service itself is a Jetty based web-application that uses the Hadoop FileSystem API to talk to the cluster, it is a separate service which provides access to Ozone via REST APIs. It should be started in addition to other regular Ozone components.
```

> You can start a docker based cluster, including the HttpFS gateway from the release package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To try it out, you can start a Docker Compose cluster that has an HttpFS gateway.
```

> Go to the `compose/ozone` directory and start the server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extract the release tarball, go to the `compose/ozone` directory and start the cluster:
```

```bash
docker-compose up -d --scale datanode=3
```

You can now see the HttpFS gateway in docker with the name `ozone_httpfs`.
HttpFS HTTP web-service API calls are HTTP REST calls that map to an Ozone file system operation. For example, using the `curl` Unix command.

> E.g. in the docker cluster you can execute commands these:

Reviewer 2: I guess "like" is missing from this part: "commands like these"?

* `curl -i -X PUT "http://httpfs:14000/webhdfs/v1/vol1?op=MKDIRS&user.name=hdfs"` creates a volume called `vol1`.

> * `$ curl 'http://httpfs-host:14000/webhdfs/v1/user/foo/README.txt?op=OPEN&user.name=foo'` returns the contents of the `/user/foo/README.txt` key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `$ curl 'http://httpfs-host:14000/webhdfs/v1/user/foo/README.txt?op=OPEN&user.name=foo'` returns the content of the key `/user/foo/README.txt`.
```

## Supported operations

These are the WebHDFS REST API operations that are supported/unsupported in Ozone.

> ### File and Directory Operations

Reviewer 2: For the following tables I would like to suggest to use the following terms:
- supported
- not implemented in Ozone
- not implemented in Ozone FileSystem API

For this to be meaningful, we should add the note about the internals I have suggested earlier.

Author: > we should add the note about the internals I have suggested earlier.
I'm not sure I got this part, what note do you think of?

> These are the WebHDFS REST API operations that are supported/unsupported in Ozone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are the tables of WebHDFS REST APIs and their state of support in Ozone.
```

Operation                       |      Support
--------------------------------|---------------------
Create and Write to a File      | supported
Append to a File                | not implemented in Ozone FileSystem API

> Concat File(s)                  | not implemented in Ozone FileSystem API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Concat File(s)                  | not implemented in Ozone
```

Open and Read a File            | supported
Make a Directory                | supported

> Create a Symbolic Link          | unsupported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a Symbolic Link          | not implemented in Ozone
```

Rename a File/Directory         | unsupported
Delete a File/Directory         | supported
Truncate a File                 | not implemented in Ozone FileSystem API
Status of a File/Directory      | supported
List a Directory                | supported
List a File                     | supported
Iteratively List a Directory    | supported

### Other File System Operations

Operation                             |      Support
--------------------------------------|---------------------
Get Content Summary of a Directory    | supported
Get Quota Usage of a Directory        | supported
Set Quota                             | not implemented in Ozone
Set Quota By Storage Type             | not implemented in Ozone

> Get File Checksum                     | not implemented in Ozone

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Get File Checksum                     | unsupported (to be fixed)
```

> Get Home Directory                    | supported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Get Home Directory                    | unsupported (to be fixed)
```

Get Trash Root                        | supported

> Set Permission                        | supported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set Permission                        | not implemented in Ozone FileSystem API
```

> Set Owner                             | supported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set Owner                             | not implemented in Ozone FileSystem API
```

> Set Replication Factor                | supported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set Replication Factor                | not implemented in Ozone FileSystem API
```

> Set Access or Modification Time       | supported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set Access or Modification Time       | not implemented in Ozone FileSystem API
```
